{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf610
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;\f2\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\pard\tx360\tx720\tx1080\tx1440\tx1800\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sa120\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 <$Scr_Ps::0>
\f1\b References\
\pard\tx720\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0 \cf0 <!$Scr_Ps::0>
\f2\fs22 Barrag\'e1n-Oca\'f1a, A., Reyes-Ruiz, G., Olmos-Pe\'f1a, S., and G\'f3mez-Viquez, H. (2019). Transgenic crops: trends and dynamics in the world and in Latin America. Transgenic Research 28, 391-399.\
\
Bazuin, S., Azadi, H., and Witlox, F. (2011). Application of GM crops in Sub-Saharan Africa: Lessons learned from Green Revolution. Biotechnology Advances 29, 908-912.\
\
Bruce, A. (2017). Genome edited animals: Learning from GM crops? Transgenic Research 26, 385-398.\
\
Burke, D. (2004). GM food and crops: what went wrong in the UK?: Many of the public's concerns have little to do with science. EMBO Reports 5, 432-436.\
\
Dawe, D., and Unnevehr, L. (2007). Crop Case Study: GMO Golden Rice in Asia with Enhanced Vitamin A Benefits for Consumers. AgBioForum 10, 154-160.\
\
Fagerstr\'f6m, T., Dixelius, C., Magnusson, U., and Sundstr\'f6m, J.F. (2012). Stop worrying; start growing: Risk research on GM crops is a dead parrot: it is time to start reaping the benefits of GM. EMBO Rep 13, 493\'96497.\
\
Falck-Zepeda, Jos\'e9 Benjamin, Guillaume P. Gru\'e8re, and Idah Sithole-Niang, eds. (2013). Genetically modified crops in Africa: economic and policy lessons from countries south of the Sahara (Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute).\
\
ISAAA (2020). Biotech Crops Continue to Help Meet the Challenges of Increased Population and Climate Change Introduction. ISAAA Brief 54-2018: Executive Summary  http://www.isaaa.org/resources/publications/briefs/54/executivesummary/default.asp. Accessed 2020-05-21.\
\
Paull, J. (2015). GMOs and Organic Agriculture: Six Lessons from Australia. Agriculture and Forestry 61, 7-14.\
}