{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2513
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 AvenirNext-Bold;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 AvenirNext-Regular;\f2\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red193\green193\blue193;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c80000\c80000\c80000;}
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Slide 1\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 I\'92m giving this presentation because of the request made at the Advisory Board meeting in May to look at the experience with the introduction of genetically engineered crops, to see what lessons might be learned that we can apply to the development and introduction of gene drive organisms. I should mention that while I\'92ll be focusing primarily on cautionary tales for this presentation, that isn\'92t to say that there haven\'92t been successes in the agricultural field. We can also learn from them, and I\'92ll be including some of these in the report I\'92m preparing, but I won\'92t be going into those much today.
\f2\fs22 \
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 \
Slide 2\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 I\'92m going start by giving a brief history of the introduction of GM crops, to set the stage and show what I see as the disconnect between technological and commercial success, and acceptance by the public.\
\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Slide 3\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 The first introductions of genetically engineered crops was in the mid-1990\'92s, starting with the FlavrSavr tomato, developed by a company called Calgene. This was a fresh-market tomato product. Interestingly, there was also a processed food product available in the UK, marketed by Sainsbury stores, based on similar technologies. Unfortunately, neither product lasted very long. The first one failed because of cost of production and distribution problems, and the second because of the public acceptance backlash that I\'92m going to talk about further today.
\f2\fs22 \

\f1\fs24 \
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Slide 4\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 The next product also still wasn\'92t a major field crop, it was a virus-resistant yellow squash, developed by a vegetable seed company, Asgrow. That product is still on the market. It wasn\'92t until Monsanto started selling their herbicide tolerant soybean seeds that the picture we now have of GM crops began to form.\
\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Slide 5\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 What\'92s the current status of these crops? This infographic shows that throughout the world, there\'92s a growing number of countries producing these crops, and the area over which they have been planted is really quite widespread. So if you\'92re measuring acceptance from this perspective you could say that it\'92s actually quite good. \
\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 Slide 6\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 In fact, you could say that commercial success hasn\'92t been dependent on public acceptance, at least in the countries where industrial genetically engineered crops have been widely commercialized. One of the consequences of the lack of public understanding of production traits is that it isn\'92t immediately obvious from the publicly observable traits that a food product comes from a genetically engineered source. Despite efforts to label them in various parts of the world, I\'92ve seen no data that the public really uses labels to avoid foods that contain GM, although companies have bought in to the non-GMO label. In these three examples, you\'92ll see that the GMO label has no connection with the risk. In the first example, non-GMO bottled water is clearly a marketing device, since the genetic engineering of water is a non-sensical concept, scientifically. The second example takes advantage of the non-GMO label even though there is evidence for negative effects of alcohol consumption and none for GMOs. And then finally, the non-GMO label for tomatoes also doesn\'92t provide the consumer with any relevant information on health, since there are currently no GMO tomatoes on the market.\cf0 \
\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Slide 7\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 And in fact this acceptance should be good, because there are multiple documented benefits of genetically engineered crops, based on a large number of published, peer-reviewed papers. I\'92m mentioning just a few here. There have been demonstrated economic benefits, such as increased yield, leading to increased farm income, and reduced labor burden (which has benefits for gender equity). For health, reduction in pesticide exposure has been well documented, and of course increased food production is a health benefit (so I\'92m getting a little bit on my soapbox that agriculture and health are closely intertwined). Finally, the greater specificity of the engineered pest resistance traits mean reduced non-target effects. Also the ability to use less toxic active ingredients, both pesticides and herbicides, has clear environmental benefits, and also enables the adoption of agricultural practices that have reduced environmental impacts.
\f2\fs22 \

\f1\fs24 \
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Slide 8\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 But these demonstrated benefits doesn\'92t mean that opposition has gone away. There is still activism against genetically engineered crops, as shown in these two pictures. There are also regions that remain firmly opposed to at least planting these crops, namely Europe, with the exception of Spain and Portugal. The European position has had an important influence on Africa, and that, on top of the resource constraints of that continent to develop appropriate regulatory infrastructure, means that adoption of genetically engineered crops has been slow in Africa.
\f2\fs22 \

\f1\fs24 \
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Slide 9\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 Europe influences Africa because of its position as an important market, and that was in part a reason for rejection of genetically engineered crops, even in the face of an acute food crisis. I should point out, though, that with time, increasing experience and regulatory capacity of African countries has meant that a more hospitable environment for these crops is developing. More African countries are approving planting, and the attitudes of countries that were previously opposed to these crops has softened. By the way, this is one positive lesson learned: investment in enabling local regulatory agencies to do their work and make decisions with confidence has been successful, even though the process has been long and has needed heavy donor investment.
\f2\fs22 \

\f1\fs24 \
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Slide 10\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 So now, I\'92m going to turn to a quick summary of the lessons learned that will be treated more thoroughly in my report.\
\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Slide 11\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 The first category of lessons learned I want to talk about is the social and cultural environment into which these products were introduced. The reason I started out this talk by describing the first genetically engineered crops introduced, was to remind us now of the things that were going on at that time that eroded confidence in regulatory agencies, especially in Europe. There was the HIV-contaminated blood supply problem in France, and the experience of mad cow disease affecting humans in the UK. These all occurred at the same time that genetically engineered crops were being introduced, and in Europe, the public had become skeptical of regulatory agencies anywhere ruling on the safety of anything.\
Perceptions of agriculture were also a key component of the receiving environment. Agriculture was seen as a threat to biodiversity (which it is, objectively), the growing intensification and use of technology in agriculture was, I think, also a factor in the lack of acceptance in Europe, and the success of the Green Revolution in Asia and Latin America, but not necessarily in Africa, also added to the skepticism that technological advances could have universal benefits.\
One other key ingredient of the receiving environment was, and still is, the lack of public understanding of the technology, due in part to the lack of broad consistency of messaging, like \'93what\'92s a GMO?\'94 But even now, regulatory agencies throughout the world don\'92t agree in their definition of what a GMO is. And easily grasped, brief messages that have an impact on the public are still needed, as opposed to the messages that opponents have carefully developed. Earlier this week I listened to a talk by Fredros Okumu of Tanzania, who noted this as an especially difficult public engagement challenge in Africa, on top of which now we have to explain what gene drives are.
\f2\fs22 \

\f1\fs24 I think this became fertile ground for opposition groups to find messages that resonated with the public\'97especially the one that GM technology is inherently unsafe. This resonated also with big donors, which then allowed opposition activities to become an economic engine for these groups. So it was in their vested interest to keep up the mistrust of the technology. Opposition groups also were able to leverage their already strong connections with environmental ministries that prioritized environment and conservation above other competing interests. This is a connection that can\'92t be underestimated for gene drives either. We can\'92t assume that the strong potential health benefits will cause environmental ministries even in disease affected countries to suddenly support gene drives.\
So, the receiving environment for gene drives will be shaped by the engagement efforts by developers but also opponents, and the latter are in my opinion better at this. And of course, the surrounding events around an introduction need to be kept in mind because they will shape the views of the technology.
\f2\fs22 \

\f1\fs24 \
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Slide 12\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 The next area of lessons learned is that the perceptions of the public are shaped by the first products. With the exception of the very first, FlavrSavr, these were production traits, not traits that had an obvious benefit to the consumer. By the time pro-poor traits such as nutritional enhancement were being developed, messaging of these had developed to include using developing countries as guinea pigs, or that these were being positioned as a Trojan horse for industry. These are arguments that can also be and are being applied against gene drives. So, it\'92s good to continue to remind the public of the possible benefits, especially with messages coming from important organizations like NEPAD and the WHO, who have said this in position statements.
\f2\fs22 \

\f1\fs24 The involvement of industry instead of non-profit or public institutions as the introducers of the first products also helped to shape perceptions. First of all, the engagement with the public that the US companies who introduced the products did, wasn't appropriate for the European public, given what I mentioned to you earlier about the low level of trust in regulators. The ownership of intellectual property by industry also worked to increase resistance. Multinationals are also an easy target to focus public concern. This was especially true because the key multinationals, particularly Monsanto (or Monsatan\'97literally being demonized), were US-based. The easy identification of a target also applies to the current funders of much of the gene drive development and associated work. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and DARPA are already being used by opponents as the Monsanto equivalents, with messaging about global domination intentions, and other hidden motives.
\f2\fs22 \

\f1\fs24 \
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Slide 13\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 Now about the impact of scientists on themselves, sometimes involving friendly fire.\
With respect to scientific support for genetically engineered crops, scientific support across all sectors was lacking. In Africa, researchers in the national agricultural research organizations, were part of the development process and so very supportive, but academic scientists weren\'92t brought on board. On the international level, the CGIAR centers were initially hesitant to highlight their involvement in genetic engineering research due to concerns about backlash. Also, environmental scientists and ecologists were opposed to the introduction of agricultural biotechnology. I can personally attest that when I was involved in developing a genetically engineered crop for industry, scientists from these disciplines were actively engaged in opposing our application to the regulatory agencies.\
At the same time, there were key scientific publications that I can see as capturing the public attention and having a major impact on public perception of the technology. For example, an early publication in the Lancet by Pusztai and Ewen on the effects of a GM potato variety on the small intestine of test animals was used to show that GM crops were toxic. A paper by Losey at al. in Nature reporting laboratory test results on the impacts of Bt toxin on the monarch butterfly, triggered a large investment by industry and the US government to show that the lab-observed effect didn\'92t translate to a significant risk in the field. A series of papers by Seralini et al., some self-published, reported that transgenic crops showed toxic and carcinogenic effects, including some sensationalistic figures of rats with tumors. Even though eventually refuted, in the case of Seralini, or shown by follow-up studies not to be a concern, the messages persisted. In fact some of the Seralini papers were key in the example I mentioned earlier where Southern African countries refused food aid. We\'92re seeing similar things now in the area of transgenic mosquitoes. The publication last year by Evans et al. I think fits into this category.\
\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Slide 14\
\pard\sa200\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 So to conclude, the four most important take-home messages from this presentation would be:\
First, as I mentioned, product benefits should be made clear to the consumer or the public who will be affected by it.\
Second, the mis-steps described here are not inherent to genetically engineered crops, and in fact are being repeated already in a few cases.\
Third, scientists can be their own worst enemy. So, one immediate step that should be taken is that we should connect with scientific communities in Africa, where gene drive interventions are likely to be introduced first, but also broadly. We\'92re going to talk about a couple of these efforts later this morning.\
Finally, I want to make a point that has really been a recurring theme throughout this talk, but not explicitly stated. That is, that in much of the communication and engagement talks I\'92ve heard recently, including those at the NIH NExTRAC meeting earlier this week, it seems that the working assumption is that it\'92s just the technology developers who are talking to and engaging the affected public. But in fact, it\'92s not just us, but groups who, for their own reasons, want these technologies not to go forward. And as I said before, they are much better (and dare I say, less constrained) than we are. Here\'92s an extreme recent example, that I\'92d like to end with. I think you\'92ll find it a short jump from here to gene drives.}